---
title: 'Micro-purchase: Do one thing well'
layout: post
---

## TL;DR
* Use many, focused objects for ease of testing
* Put analogous functionality in analogous file locations
* Pull out core logic into libraries to service multiple interfaces
* Apply best practices everywhere, including JS and tests

## Our purpose
Though we pride ourselves on our
[transparent and remote-friendly workplace](https://18f.gsa.gov/2015/10/15/best-practices-for-distributed-teams/),
our project focus tends to inadvertently silo engineers from each other.
Rather than wait for knowledge to naturally diffuse through team changes, we
try to kick-start this transfer through shared interest groups, tech talks,
and documents highlighting some of the more interesting design decisions our
developers have made. Today, we’ll focus on some of the core architectural
philosophies behind the Micro-purchase project.

Contracting for software is often an arduous process; we
[wanted](https://18f.gsa.gov/2015/10/13/open-source-micropurchasing/) to make
this easier. More specifically, we wanted to create an online marketplace for
contributors to 18F open source projects. Though it’s passed through many
forms (including a proof-of-concept Google form, a Ruby Sinatra app, and the
current Ruby on Rails app), we have effectively
[built](https://micropurchase.18f.gov/) powerful, custom auction software,
complete with bidding restrictions, access control, and an admin panel. Along
the way, we’ve taken a strong stance on the topic of responsibility: we want
each object to be responsible for *one* chunk of logic -- to do one thing well.

## Lonely models, views, and controllers 
Rails takes a very strong stance on the separation of models (i.e. data),
views (i.e. markup), and controllers (which translate user actions into data
manipulations). Often, this leads to so called “fat” models, “skinny”
controllers and “thin” views, meaning the majority of the business logic lives
within the models. In this architecture, models are responsible not just for
loading/querying data, but also handling data transforms, encoding business
logic and state transitions, etc. Models have too many responsibilities.

A better strategy is to give each component a *single* responsibility. Rather
than add scoped queries to our models, we add 
[*Query Objects*](http://craftingruby.com/posts/2015/06/29/query-objects-through-scopes.html),
which encapsulate the exact query parameters we need. Rather than placing
business logic within models or controllers, we use 
[*Service Objects*](https://www.netguru.co/blog/service-objects-in-rails-will-help),
which each handle a major function of the application. Instead of including
complicated logic in the controllers and implicitly passing the results to the
view,
[*View Objects*](http://blog.codeclimate.com/blog/2012/10/17/7-ways-to-decompose-fat-activerecord-models/)
provide clear interfaces which define the methods we can use when rendering.

This approach leads to dozens of small, “plain old ruby objects” (POROs). Each
fits a specific role (such as “validator,” “parser,” or “presenter”) but only
handles that *one* function. This makes testing very straight-forward; specific
logic means fewer code branches. Further, objects of the same role share a
similar position within the repository tree and class name, creating a form of
standardization across the project.


| Repository | Lines of Ruby | Ruby File Count | Avg Lines per File |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| [C2](https://github.com/18F/C2) | 24549 | 561 | 44 |
| [dolores-landingham](https://github.com/18F/dolores-landingham-bot) | 2957 | 106 | 28 |
| [identity-idp](https://github.com/18F/identity-idp) | 11696 | 200 | 58 |
| [open-data-maker](https://github.com/18F/open-data-maker) | 5482 | 63 | 87 |
| [**micropurchase**](https://github.com/18F/micropurchase) | **11136** | **290** | **38** |

## Examples: View-, Service-, Rule- and Null Objects
In our app, different users should see different content, including slightly
different chunks of markup. “Guests” receive a welcome message while normal
users won’t, for example. We could program that sort of logic into the view
(i.e. markup template) or add the logic in the relevant controller, but both
approaches would be difficult to maintain and particularly challenging to
test. Instead, we create “View Objects”, POROs with very clear interfaces for
exclusive use within views; they also contain the logic relevant to permission
checking, markup selection, etc. Combined, the clean interface and focused
logic resolve our troubles around testability.

As we’ll describe in detail later, there’s also a need to surface the same
functionality through multiple interfaces (e.g. browsers and multiple versions
of an HTTP API). Adding that logic to a controller or view is not an
appropriate choice. In addition to the reasons mentioned above, this approach
limits reusability: each of the interfaces would need to call into that
controller or inherit from it. Placing the logic in our models is also not
ideal, as most of these actions involve *multiple* models. Here, “Service
Objects” provide a cleaner alternative. They pull the functionality into
separate libraries which can be referenced by multiple user interfaces.
Further, as each object is responsible for exactly one action, we can list the
major functions of our app by listing a single directory.

Let us finally consider how these POROs compose. Individual auctions will have
different business rules: some may only apply to small businesses, some may
allow multiple bids, etc. Each auction has a *combination* of these traits; we
might naively implement this through classical object-oriented inheritance,
but such an approach  isn’t feasible and leads to a combinatorial explosion as
new options are added over time. We *could* encode each bit of logic with a
switch-case/if-else; this makes finding the logic easy but explodes the size
of our classes. To account for both problems, we represent rules as POROs.
Auctions defer to their specific combination of rules, which are each
represented by this single-purpose “Rule” object. We also make routine use of
dedicated 
"[NullObject](https://robots.thoughtbot.com/rails-refactoring-example-introduce-null-object)”
classes, which eliminate the need to explicitly check if an object is nil --
for instance, a NullBid object with similar methods to the Bid model is
returned when the auction’s winning bid is not available. Do you notice the
trend? 

![Objects playing the role of Controller, Service, Validator, and Rule]({{site.baseurl}}/architecture-reviews/micro-purchase/roles.png)

## Population control
As with any design decision, the PORO approach has trade-offs. While we gain
laser focus, it can be difficult to find the objects most relevant to
day-to-day maintenance/feature building. With multiple levels of wrapping,
delegation, and indirection, we might need to hop through several files before
we figure out where certain functionality is defined. Similarly, a single pull
request might change 15+ files to add a small feature. These levels also make
determining object types challenging: is this *auction* variable an ORM
record?  A View Model? A Service? Stack this with rail’s implicit imports and
our naming scheme becomes ever more important.

Though still a pain point, we have several strategies for mitigating these
issues. Obviously, familiarity with the code base and similar practices on
other projects reduces confusion substantially, but we have a few other
tricks. We try to name classes consistently (e.g. “DcTimePresenter”,
“SamStatusPresenter”, etc.) to encode their function, though the resolve to do
that thoroughly has waned. More importantly, classes that perform the same
“role” are grouped together within the code base. All presenters live in a
folder separate from all serializers separate from all validators, and so
forth. Knowing what role you are looking for, then, gives you a big clue as to
where to find it.

We’ve also considered some alternative solutions to this organization problem.
Ruby’s namespaces might help, but we’ve been bit by unexpected application
outages due to the interplay between namespaces and Rails’ automatic path
inclusion. An inverted approach, where presenters, decorators, etc. are
organized first by a shared data type wouldn’t work for this particular
application, as the logic is too tightly bound. That said, we may split the
admin interface off into a separate module using this strategy in the future.

```
    + controllers
    + models
    + ...
    + presenters
    |       - currency.rb
    |       ...
    + serializers
    |       - auction_serializer.rb
    |       ...
    + services
    |       - check_payment.rb
    |       ...
    + validators
    |       - duns_number_validator.rb
    |       ...
    + view_models
    |       - auction_list_item.rb
    |       ...
    + ...
```

## Different APIs, same solution
The Micropurchase app has been built with multiple consumers in mind. The
majority of our existing users are browser-based, meaning that they navigate
the system’s user interface through Chrome, Edge, Firefox, et al, placing bids
by clicking buttons, typing text, etc. However, we also anticipated (and have
realized) API users: those who access our system via automated tools. For
example, vendors may want to be notified of all auctions within their
technical domain, to automatically bid, or perform other non-UI-driven
actions. Our challenge is to keep the two interfaces, browser and machine, in
*sync*, so that both have the same capabilities.

The initial solution was to have a single controller handle both types of
requests. The controller could perform queries, save new data, etc. but vary
the *format* of response based on the request’s “accepts” header (i.e. 
[content negotiation](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Content_negotiation)). If
the same endpoint served all requests, we ensured functional parity, or so the
thinking went. Unfortunately, the shared controller strategy assumes that
there is a direct mapping between the functionality web-browsing and API users
want. This is not safe; machines generally want clear compartmentalization
while humans want pages to stitch together multiple types of content. Consider
pagination, alone; end users typically reject hundreds of results on a single
page while API users would generally prefer them. Adding this logic to the
controller leads to lots of if-thens and *different* code paths -- exactly
what we wanted to avoid. This becomes even worse when granting the possibility
of multiple API versions.

Instead, we want to think about the API as a separate product. We considered
writing in an API-first style (where our webapp consumes our
completely-distinct API), but decided against this due to startup cost. We
didn’t know what the product would be doing, so creating a good API would be
difficult. We also didn’t want to manage multiple apps (potentially multiple
servers) at the offset. We also rejected developing a single-page app (which
would enforce the API vs UI separation) due to compatibility concerns, issues
around client-side authentication, and team familiarity with Rails. Our
solution? Service Objects! Each interface (web UI, API versions) call into
shared Service Objects (which contains all of the shared code); the controller
just needs to convert the input/output as appropriate.

![Both API and HTML controllers use PlaceBid Service]({{site.baseurl}}/architecture-reviews/micro-purchase/service.png)

## Other applications
While we didn’t want to create a single-page app, we knew we’d leverage
“progressive enhancement” to make more usable interfaces, particularly around
our report system. Progressive enhancement can be a murky topic, however,
particularly when applying it to dynamic interfaces. Which logic should live
with Rails, which should live in JavaScript, and should any be duplicated? The
principle of single responsibility gives us some rules of thumb to help answer
this question. Logic specific to an interactive interface (e.g. around sorting
results, formatting graphs, etc.) should live in JS as that’s JS’s sole
responsibility. Business logic, however, must live within Rails (specifically,
the Service Objects) as that’s their raison d'etre. Despite some potential
value for API users, the interactive logic doesn’t fit the API’s purpose, so
we keep them separate. We must admit to one major risk with this strategy:
siloing by discipline often leads to redundant code and more importantly, can
harm team morale. Ideally, no developer has single “ownership” over any chunk
of code, despite our do-one-thing-well theory.

In the testing realm, the single-responsibility focus has influenced our
stance on behavior driven tests. Written in
[Gherkin](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cucumber_(software)#Gherkin_.28Language.29)
syntax, these tests are hypothetically useful to folks who aren’t able to read
lower-level tests (i.e.  non-developers). Though there’s potential for
leveraging these when discussing with bureaucrats in the future, we’re not
confident in that pay off. These tests are problematic in large part due to
the annoyances of mixing testing and parsing logic. Before we can write a
test, we need to define the steps in our Gherkin scenarios, which often
requires writing implementations of those *steps* as well. BDD tests conflate
those tasks, which seems at odds with our single-purpose stance. Further,
Gherkin lacks established style guides; while we’ve created our own, we
continue to be challenged by minor variations in these steps such as “When I
sign in” vs “When I log in” vs “I am logged in”.  Combine this with our
uncertainty around specific value to our users, we are considering removing
these tests.

## Conclusion
We’ve now seen some of the implications of following a core philosophy
throughout a code base. Designing with focused, single-purpose POROs makes
testing easy and can standardize a vocabulary within a project. Dozens of
small classes can be difficult to navigate, but the approach works with a
diligent team. In particular, placing core application functionality in
separate libraries makes supporting multiple interfaces a snap. We’ve also
discussed how this principle can be applied to the division between front-end
and back-end as well as BDD-style testing. We ask you now, do your modules
each do one thing this well?

---

This document is the distillation of an architecture discussion between Alan
deLevie, Jacob Harris, Brian Hedberg, CM Lubinski, Atul Varma, and Jessie
Young. Many thanks also to Kane Baccigalupi for early technical leadership on
the project. For more information about the Micropurchase project, see
[https://micropurchase.18f.gov/](https://micropurchase.18f.gov/), their GitHub
[repository](https://github.com/18F/micropurchase), and thoughts around 
[limiting technical debt](https://github.com/18F/micropurchase/blob/8c536e3064fa6bcc9c1c4d6131b9db51a8e456cb/docs/technical_debt.md).

